Hey daily listeners, Kevin Roose here.
I'm a tech columnist at the New York
Times and I'm also the co-host of the
New York Times podcast Hardfork. And I'm
Casey Newton, the other co-host of
Hardfork. And we have a special
announcement before today's show, which
is that we have made merchandise. We
have made hats, Kevin. Incredible,
beautiful hats. These hats are available
for a limited time as a thank you gift
to people who purchase a new annual New
York Times audio subscription. They're
black. They say hard fork on them.
They're very pretty. And an audio
subscription supports shows like ours,
as well as shows like The Daily, The
Ezra Klein Show, Modern Love, and
Cannonball, the new Wesley Morris Show.
So, please, if you haven't yet, go
subscribe to New York Times audio, and
you will get this beautiful hat sent in
the mail to your door. That's right. So,
if you live in the United States, you
can subscribe and get your very own
hardfork hat at ny times.com/hardforkat.
It's way more useful than a tote bag.
And plus, you already have a 100 tote
bags. What do you need another tote bag
for? Go get a hat. From the New York
Times, I'm Natalie Kitroof. This is the
Daily.
[Music]
For years, Uber has said it's one of the
safest ways to travel. But a Times
investigation has found that behind
closed doors, the company's been
contending with a massive problem.
Hundreds of thousands of people
reporting that they'd been sexually
assaulted or harassed during Uber rides.
Today, my colleague Emily Steel on what
executives knew about the problem and
how they failed to take certain steps
that were supposed to make riders safer.
It's Friday, August 8th.
[Music]
So Emily, you've covered sexual assault
for the New York Times for years. You've
won a Pulitzer for your Me Too coverage,
and you've also covered safety issues in
a number of industries. Tell me how you
arrived at looking at Uber because I
think this investigation kind of
combines your two areas of expertise.
Yeah, so it was back in March. Someone
had suggested that I look into Uber and
to look into the company's issues with
sexual assault. And at first I was
skeptical. I thought, you know,
everybody knows about Uber's rockus tech
bro period. Everybody knew about the CEO
Travis Kalanick who reigned over Uber
during this wild time when there was
scandal after scandal. There was a 2014
rape in India that made headlines and
the company came under scrutiny for how
it handled that incident. There were
also a lot of issues inside the company
where there was sexual harassment within
the workplace allegations were very
prominent at the company during that
time. And then what happened was the
company cleaned up.
Travis Kalanick was pushed out of the
company. Uber hired this new CEO. His
name was Darra Kazahi.
[Music]
He was the head of Expedia previously
and he was really seen as the grown-up
who had come in to clean up this
company's tech bro culture to get this
company ready for its initial public
offering.
He introduced a new era he said of
transparency and integrity and
accountability and the company promises
that they will put safety first.
The motto for the company has switched
from super pumped to do the right thing
period. And publicly it really seemed
like the company had cleaned things up.
And so it made me wonder,
>> is there a story here?
>> And what did you find?
>> So then I started to look and I started
to dig a little bit and I saw that there
were lawsuits against Uber all across
the country. And I saw that there were
these two proceedings that were
consolidated in California. One in state
court and one in federal court where
there were literally hundreds of
lawsuits from people who had claimed
that they had been assaulted or harassed
by their Uber drivers.
>> There was a person who said that they
were sexually assaulted, battered,
raped, harassed, and attacked by their
driver. There was another complaint
where somebody said that their Uber
driver had thrown this woman's phone and
purse out of the vehicle, pulled over
and started to do all this terrible
stuff to her.
>> Yikes.
>> And then I came across a story that was
just horrifying. It happened on a
Thursday night in December in 2023.
[Music]
There was a woman in Houston who called
an Uber to come pick her up from an
apartment complex.
So, she was picked up at 8:53 p.m. She
wanted to be dropped off at this house
about 22 minutes away, but the trip
diverged
with an 8 minute stop near a gas
station.
At that point, Uber sent a notification
to this woman. It's an automatic
notification to check on her, to say,
"Are you okay?" She didn't respond.
And then the ride continued to deviate
from its route. And at 9:29 p.m. it
stopped near a Motel 6,
Uber sent another notification to check
on this woman. She didn't respond.
And then 4 minutes later, Uber tries to
contact her with a ROOC call. She
doesn't pick up. And this trip remains
active on Uber with no recorded movement
until the driver marks it complete at
2:01 a.m.
About 4 hours later, this woman calls
Uber and she's frantic. She said that
she had been intoxicated. She said that
she had been taken to a hotel and raped
by her Uber driver. She said that she
woke up in a hotel room with that driver
who then fled after she became frantic.
>> That is just a horrific story.
>> Yeah. So Uber banned the driver
immediately after the incident and I was
able to get my hands on an internal
investigation into what happened. The
driver had received two previous
accusations of sexual misconduct against
him for making inappropriate comments.
and three automated attempts to try to
get in touch with this rider had gone
unanswered.
And it says in this report, it says,
quote, "Are our actions or lack of
actions defensible?"
And what was really scary is that she
wasn't alone. As I started to look more
and more into this, I saw case after
case after case after case. And so I
thought, gosh, I I don't think people
know about this. This is happening in
Illinois, in Maryland, in North
Carolina, in Colorado, Nevada,
Minnesota, California, Florida, just
like all across the country. And the
claims were recent.
>> These weren't claims from 2014. They
weren't claims from 2018. They were
claims from 2023, 2024, 2021, 2022. It
was it was recent stuff. And so, it made
me wonder,
how big is this problem? What is the
scope of this problem? What does the
company know? What have they done about
it? And what have they not done about
it?
>> How do you go about getting to the
bottom of those questions?
>> That was a really big challenge. I
learned initially that there was no
central database that collects all of
these reports of sexual assault in the
ride share industry. So I thought, okay,
maybe I can build my own. and I
submitted freedom of information
requests to cities all across the
country to say how many police reports,
how many complaints of sexual assault do
these different municipalities receive?
>> And that is a long process. And so I
submitted those requests and then kind
of kept digging
>> and then I talked to a lot of sources
and what people said was that
the place where I could get all of this
information would be Uber. that Uber
would know how many reports of assault
were happening on its platform.
>> Right.
>> Uber collects all of that information.
And so I was determined to figure out
how I could get my hands on that
information.
>> You got to go to the source.
>> I had to get the data. Yeah.
>> And it sounds like you did somehow.
>> I did somehow. Obviously, I can't say
how I got this information, but over the
course of this reporting, I was able to
get my hands on literally thousands of
pages of internal company documents.
These are emails, they are Slack
messages, they are PowerPoint
presentations, they are reports and
other documents. Hundreds of these
documents have been filed
in court under seal.
>> Okay. And what do you see when you're
looking at these documents?
>> So, one of the first things that catches
my eye when I'm looking at these
documents is a
spreadsheet and it says Uber trips with
reports of sexual assault or sexual
misconduct in the US. And what it says
is that Uber received a report of sexual
assault or sexual misconduct in the
United States almost every 8 minutes on
average between 2017 and 2022.
>> One report to Uber of sexual misconduct
or assault every 8 minutes. What does
that amount to?
>> So the total number for that period is
400,181.
>> Wow. That is much more than what the
company has publicly disclosed.
Publicly, the company has said that they
had 12,522
accounts of serious sexual assault on
the platform during the same time
period. But Uber had not revealed the
total number of sexual assault and
sexual misconduct reports that it had
received. Okay, so this is a difference
basically between what Uber is saying is
serious sexual assault and this bigger
far bigger number that includes all
sexual assaults and claims of
harassment.
>> Exactly. Uber tracks 21 different
categories of sexual assault and sexual
misconduct. What it reveals publicly is
five of what it considers the most
serious categories of sexual assault.
And this number, this 400,000 figure,
represents all of the cases of sexual
assault and sexual misconduct on the
platform.
>> Did you ask Uber about this? What did
what do they say?
>> I did ask Uber about this and what Uber
has said is that there is no tolerable
level of sexual assault. And they did
point out that about 75% of those
400,000
reports were quote unquote less serious
in nature. They were things like making
comments about somebody's appearance,
flirting, or using explicit language.
The company also said that those 400,000
reports had not been audited by the
company, so they could include incorrect
reports or also fraudulent reports that
were submitted by people who wanted a
refund.
>> Okay. So, they're saying 75% of that
400,000 is less serious, but I guess I
mean to me, you know, 25% of that amount
is still like a 100,000 claims. That's a
big number. What Uber says is millions
of people hail a car in the US every
single day and that the vast majority of
those trips go without incident. They
say 99.9%
of rides occur without any report any
safety report of any kind. And they say
that because Uber operates on such a
large scale that you're going to see the
best and worst of society show up on
those rides.
But the thing is that even a fraction of
a percent can translate into many, many
attacks.
>> So it sounds like you're seeing the
answer to your first question that you
came to these documents with, which is
what's the scope of this problem? And
that answer is it is big. It's a big
problem. What did you learn about your
second question which is what did Uber
know and when did they know it? What did
they do?
>> So as I'm paging through these
documents, it's literally thousands and
thousands and thousands of pages. And
what I found was that Uber not only was
aware of this problem but they actually
were studying incidents of sexual
violence by 2016
and that year there were data scientists
in the company and they saw that sexual
assault followed distinct patterns on
the platform.
>> What do you mean by that? What are what
are the patterns?
>> So women most often are the victims
whether they are passengers or drivers.
The attacks typically occur late at
night and on the weekend with pickups
originating near a bar. In the vast
majority of these cases, the offenders
are men, either drivers or passengers.
>> And those men, both the drivers and
passengers, have records of sexual
misconduct complaints on Uber and low
ratings. And then intoxicated passengers
are especially vulnerable.
>> It's interesting. We're not just talking
about female passengers, right? It's
also female drivers who are experiencing
harassment and assault at the hands of
passengers,
>> right? And that was something that
wasn't an issue that I immediately knew
about, but it was something that I
learned about in this reporting that
drivers are victims, too. It's not just
passengers.
And one of the other really interesting
things that I found is that for years,
teams inside of Uber have tested tools
that they found were effective at making
trips safer,
but the company delayed or did not
require its drivers to adopt some of
those most promising programs. And they
also didn't warn passengers about the
factors that it linked to attacks.
We'll be right back.
[Music]
Emily, let's talk about these tools that
you said Uber developed that that the
company itself thought could kind of
help prevent sexual assault during
rides. Tell me about those solutions.
>> Yeah, so I think there are three worth
talking about.
One was designed to be part of the
sophisticated algorithm that happens
behind the scenes when you open up the
Uber app and tap to request a ride.
There were teams of data scientists
inside of Uber who for years
worked to develop this special model to
forecast which matches between a driver
and a passenger might lead to a sexual
assault.
>> How do they do that?
>> So, there was this one presentation that
I looked at. It was a 2017 presentation.
It was called preventing sexual assault.
And this document detailed how the
company could use 43 different
predictors, things like reporting a
creepy driver, safety incident reports,
geographic information like the number
of bars near a pickup. And this
datadriven machine learning model does
some sort of sophisticated calculation
to score the risks of pairings between
drivers and passengers.
And the company actually quietly tested
this program in Los Angeles in 2018. And
what Uber found is that this program
could correctly anticipate 15%
of sexual assaults on trips that were
using Uber's basic ride hailing option.
>> Sorry. So, are you saying that Uber was
running a safety test on like live
customers where the company is
accurately predicting ahead of time that
someone is likely to be assaulted or
harassed?
>> That's what these documents show. They
show that the company was testing this
model in shadow mode and not acting on
it. An internal presentation a few
minutes later on this tool called it
potentially the most effective
intervention for preventing sexual
assaults.
>> So what do they do with it?
>> So what I learned is that this tool has
been up and running in the United States
since 2022.
So it's part of that system that Uber
now uses to respond when you request a
trip. and it has long been considered a
trade secret at the company and the
company hasn't spoken publicly about
this technology until now. The way that
this tool works, it first determines the
risk of potential pairings between
drivers and passengers and then it uses
those scores to try to select the best
match. And so it will prioritize rides
that are safer and downrank pairings
between drivers and passengers that are
less safe.
>> So the rides that are determined as
risky are deprioritized. They're put at
the end of the line of all the options
that you might get when you call an
Uber. Right.
>> Exactly. But what I found in all of
these records was a document from 2024
and it identified a problem with this
system. It said that Uber was still
dispatching trips that it had identified
as high risk.
>> So why not just eliminate those
pairings? Why not, for example, kick off
those drivers or riders that are seen as
potentially, you know, aggressive? So
Uber does say that it bans drivers and
passengers that are accused of serious
sexual assault or a number of lower
level complaints.
And what it also says is that this
technology cannot reliably predict
whether an individual pairing or trip
will result in an incident or not.
And Uber also said that if they were to
unilaterally block all sorts of trips
like requests from bars late at night
that that could leave many people
stranded on the street and it could
encourage them to drive drunk or walk
home and safely. So they're making the
argument that look this tool might be
useful but it isn't completely
predictive and trying to mitigate the
risk on any one pairing could actually
lead to more dangerous scenarios.
>> Right?
>> So what's the second solution that the
company looked at?
>> So another solution that the company has
been exploring for years is the idea
that you could pair women drivers with
women passengers. theoretically the
people least likely to assault each
other,
>> right? The company first introduced this
option in Saudi Arabia in 2019 with the
choice for women drivers to select women
passengers, but Uber held off
introducing this as an option in the
United States.
>> How come? Well, so what's really
interesting though is as recently as
last fall, executives green lit a pilot
for a women matching option in the
United States and it was supposed to
start in November.
And then days after Donald Trump is
elected president, executives decided to
hold off and there was an internal
document that said this is not the right
environment to launch and we want to
take a beat to reassess our timing. Hm.
I'm just wondering overall, is this
really a long-term solution to the
problem? Because there aren't that many
women Uber drivers, at least in my
experience, there's way more men driving
for the platform. So, one of the big
issues or one of the big hurdles to
introducing this option is Uber had to
have enough women drivers.
>> Sure. And there was an internal document
that I found that said that several
high-profile assaults had made it
difficult to attract those women to
drive for Uber. It said safety has
ranked as one of the top reasons for
prospective female drivers to not join
Uber and for current female drivers to
not drive during certain hours of the
day. There also are other things to
think about. people inside the company
worried if we introduce this are we
telegraphing that other Uber rides are
not safe. There were worries that if
this option were to cost more, would
that be considered a pink tax? And most
importantly, there was the fear of
gender discrimination and other lawsuits
that the company calculated could cost
more than $und00 million.
But despite all of that, the company did
announce at the end of July that it was
going to start testing women matching
options in Los Angeles, San Francisco,
and Detroit.
>> It sounds like in the case of both of
these first two options, you have them
rolled out in one case without us
knowing. In the other case, there was a
a long delay before it happened. What
about the third solution?
So the third solution is dash cams. As
early as 2014, the company had been
exploring the idea of using cameras in
cars. And then the new CEO comes in
Darra Kajra Shahi and he outlines this
vision of installing inexpensive
cameras in Uber cars that would record
trips by default. Employees studied this
plan and they found not only would it be
feasible and cost-effective, but it also
was likely to reduce sexual misconduct
and help drivers. But the company didn't
do it.
>> Why not?
>> Largely because installing cameras in
Uber cars would conflict with the
company's business model.
>> How so? What do you mean by that?
So by design, Uber drivers are
classified as independent contractors,
not employees. That means that Uber and
other gig economy companies can avoid
paying significant costs that are
associated with traditional employment.
So that's things like minimum wage, it's
overtime, it's employee benefits, it's
time for rest breaks.
>> This is the key to Uber's business
model. And Uber goes to great lengths
not to treat drivers like employees.
And so they do things like limit
trainings and not require certain
equipment like cameras to be installed
in cars. This seems pretty critical to
the whole story. I mean preserving that
contracting model is obviously so
important to Uber. You can imagine how
much their costs would go up if suddenly
they had all of these drivers as
employees,
>> right? It's crucial to the company's
business. And what Uber says is that it
offers the option through its apps for
drivers and passengers to record audio
and for drivers to use their phones and
the front-facing camera on their phone
to record video. but that the decision
not to require video recording had as
much to do with very practical
challenges and privacy concerns as it
did with drivers employment
classification. So Uber has essentially
come up with a hybrid solution and the
advantage for Uber is that those options
preserve the company's business model.
>> Just to explore for a second what I
imagine that the company's position is.
If the drivers are not employees of
Uber, is it fair actually to hold the
company responsible for what happens in
their cars? You know, it's like I think
we all know that when we order an Uber,
we're getting into a private car that's
being driven by a gig driver. Sure,
they've been vetted to some extent by
the company, but Uber is just the
matchmaker, right? They aren't literally
providing the service.
>> You're right. That's the company's
position. And it is at the core of the
litigation that Uber is now facing in
these 3,000 lawsuits in federal and
state courts from passengers who said
that they were sexually assaulted or
harassed by their Uber drivers. The
company has called those lawsuits a
legally baseless attempt to hold it
liable for the extremely rare and
unforeseeable criminal acts of
independent drivers.
In some cases, the company has even
turned around and sued those drivers
that were accused of assault,
essentially saying that if those
allegations were true, that the drivers
had violated their agreements with the
company. But the people suing Uber claim
that the company is responsible for the
misconduct of their drivers. They say
that the company is more interested in
growth than protecting its passengers.
And then they say that the company has
gone to great lengths to cover up what
they've described as a sexual assault
epidemic.
>> In just thinking about the three
solutions that we've talked about, it
does seem as though in each case, there
was an aspect of this that the company
wasn't really publicizing either the
problem itself or the solution in some
cases. And I guess I'm wondering why you
think that is because it does seem like
something that you know writers would
have wanted to know about.
Right. So, in my reporting, that was
something that was really striking to me
because at the same time that Uber was
studying this problem, developing tools
for this problem, they also were
deploying some pretty aggressive media
campaigns to publicize that Uber is one
of the safest options for travel. And to
highlight these risks could present a
problem. It could say, "Hey, we might
not be as safe as what we said we were."
>> So, you're saying basically one of the
reasons the company might not be telling
people about this is that it could freak
people out. It could scare them away. It
could contradict that message of safety.
>> And the idea of warning customers about
the patterns linked to attacks has
actually caused some riffs inside of the
company. There have been people who have
said internally, look, we need to tell
people. We need to tell them the rides
that are the the most risky are the ones
when people are getting picked up by a
bar, if it's a single woman in the back
seat alone, if she's intoxicated.
And the company ultimately decided not
to. I found a presentation discussing
whether or not the company should
include day or time patterns about when
these incidents occur. And there's a
slide in this presentation that
basically says if we include this
information, it will lead to fewer
people riding in Ubers.
>> Huh. So directly saying the quiet part
out loud, this could hurt our business,
>> right? It does seem as though a lot of
this comes down to transparency. I mean,
whether Uber is liable is is sort of for
the courts to decide, but the fact that
the company is really not making this
public, isn't being honest with us about
what the risks are, and then letting us
decide if we want to get in the car. I
mean, that feels like a really important
question in all of this. And that's
something that came up over and over
again in my reporting is how much does
the company know? How much has it told
us about what it knows? And what should
Uber tell us about what it knows? And if
people know about the harm and they know
about the risks, they can take steps to
protect themselves and to protect
others,
>> right?
>> So maybe they won't take an Uber by
themselves when they're drunk coming
home from a bar.
>> Sure.
>> Maybe they won't put their drunk friend
in the backseat of a car. maybe they
will turn on the options to record the
audio of those rides.
You see the stats and you see the data
and you see how there were 6.3 billion
rides that occurred during this time
period when all of these assaults
occurred. That's just a fraction of a
percent of rides that end in serious
incidents.
But when you look at those individual
incidents, it's stories of people who
lives have been epended by one ride and
they're facing a lot of trauma and a lot
of pain.
And the question is,
if they had had more information, would
they have been better able to protect
themselves?
And did the company do enough to protect
its customers?
[Music]
Emily, thanks so much for your time.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
After 10 hours of deliberations,
Israel's leaders approved Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu's proposal to expand
the war by taking control of Gaza City,
according to an announcement by the
government. The move goes against the
advice of the Israeli military.
But the announcement appeared to stop
short of saying that Israel would take
full control of the Gaza Strip,
something Netanyahu said earlier was his
goal.
In an interview on Fox News on Thursday,
before the Security Cabinet met,
Netanyahu said Israel did not want to
maintain permanent control of Gaza or
govern it.
The Security Cabinet also approved
several principles for ending the war,
including the return of all remaining
hostages, the disarming of Hamas, and
the establishment of an alternative
governing body in Gaza that doesn't
include Hamas or the Palestinian
Authority.
It'll likely take the military days, if
not weeks, to call up reserve forces and
to allow time for the forced evacuation
of tens of thousands of Palestinians
from the new areas of combat.
And
President Trump has announced he's
nominating Steven Myron, his top
economic adviser, to serve as a governor
at the Federal Reserve.
Myron has been a staunch defender of
Trump's economic policies and has echoed
the president's criticism of Fed Chair
Jerome Powell for not lowering interest
rates.
Trump made it clear that Myron would
serve in the position temporarily if
confirmed by the Senate, though it's
possible that he could stay on. The
White House is planning to run a
separate process to nominate someone to
fill the seat starting in February. And
that person could potentially be
elevated to become the chair of the
central bank next year when Pal's term
expires.
Today's episode was produced by Olivia
Nat, Jessica Chung, and Eric Kropky. It
was edited by Maria Burn and Michael
Benois. Contains original music by
Marian Lozano and Dan Powell and was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you on Monday.
[Music]